<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width; initial-scale=1.0; "\>Event ID: 2028539
Event Started: 10/22/2012 6:00:00 PM
----------

Please stand by for realtime captions. 
>> Good afternoon, everyone welcome to today's webinar on Agency experience with activity based models.  A name is Bryant Grady and I serve as a Rich sport program corner on behalf of a WHO I will be moderating this afternoon session.  Today's session is the first in a new series which is an addendum to the recently completed -- instructional series on activity-based modeling.  In this series we will showcase Agency experience is an activity-based models by demonstrating how the research, theory and concepts presented in the preceding series when not being put into practice by agencies all across the country. 
>> Our first session was showcased the Atlanta regional commission presented by [Indiscernible] to go before we begin I have a few administrative items to mentioned.  In order to provide the best possible audio experience we will be automatically and remotely meeting all the participants phone lines.  This webinar will last approximate two hours.  We will have one and have our presentation followed by 30 minutes for questions and answers.  You can submit questions via the webinar meeting room software.  A question and answer pod is displayed on your screen and you can enter your questions they are.  There will be posted -- posted presented during the Q&A session at the end of this webinar. 
>> We are recording this webinar and will make it available on the TMIP committee of practice within two weeks.  The webinar is also being like closed captioning for the hearing impaired.  If you do not wish to view the closed captions, civilly click the full screen button at the top right-hand corner to maximize the slide view only. 
>> Finally, the information in this webinar is made available for knowledge and experience sharing purposes only and does not represent an endorsement by FHWA.  I'm very pleased to introduce today's speaker, Guy Rousseau, is the surveys and transportation model development manager for the Atlanta regional commission.  He's primarily responsible for model development that committees in support of regional transportation plan and air quality conformity and missions analyses.  You serve on more than a dozen model period two panels and is also the chair of charities ABJ 40 committee on travel survey methods.  Thank you very much for your participation today, Guy. 
>> Thank you, Bryant.  So I will get started so first slide here is my nativity-based model that the -- we had a few purpose and goals in mind so I will go over those.  First one is enhance the third goal and integrity of a regional travel demand model in order to achieve that purpose [Indiscernible]'s series of goals first one being we want to provide greater sensitivities to things like demographic shifts, making a being -- if you publish as publishing as well as the repricing policies.  We also want to improve visualization model results could we also want to better representation of trip chaining as well as intra- household interactions.  With that in mind we also formulated a strategic plan for active-based model development.  A few items here we wanted to work for Buckley and incrementally, and Krinsley meaning taking one step at a time and put the ABM in place an incremental fashion.  We also wanted to maintain a dual track for model development and implementation mean we wanted to continue to improve our today's model and also wanted to develop an active base model.  Along those lines we also want to make sure of ongoing -- quality assurance and quality control especially with regards to our [Indiscernible] base model result. 
>> First I like to acknowledge a few firms and individuals that have been helping us over the years.  Persons per Groff, Atkins, John Bowman and Mark Bradley.  So first I'm going to [Indiscernible] is from the [Indiscernible] but I don't want to go into the details of the CT [Indiscernible] as it is been presented in previous webinars.  But here's a few highlights.  First the treatment of space to go first of all, the planning region is a 20 county region is shown here in the mouth and we have a little over 2000 TAZs at the moment.  There is updated -- says ability of short while, long what and no walk in that's probably due to the [Indiscernible] zones as we move into smartest don't have the need for something like that also origin in this nation are identified by TAZ Nsub zone and when you look at the choice component over active base model there's a total of over 6000 alternatives total in this nation. 
>> Treatment of time, the time of day choice models work on an hourly basis, hourly periods, perhaps the next it would be to go into 30 minute increments for right now it is an hourly basis.  AM and midday scams are used in choice and we output trips assigned by [Indiscernible] periods for highway and then three for the transit so the five are listed down here on the highway side. 
>> As far as treatment of modes, as shown here it is basically we have [Indiscernible] trips on the left-hand side which is divided between drive alone, shared to or shared three plus.  And within each of those we have a toll and non-polled [Indiscernible] a free path or they pay in the right-hand side or the transit trips physically those are what transit trips and direct transit trips and then further subdivided into local and pre-local being the local bus systems where [Indiscernible] is monorail system.  We also have nonmotorized modes of walk and bike.  That you can see we have -- County especially fertile versus non-toll [Indiscernible] choice and mode choice and also decipher between local and [Indiscernible] service payment as I said is expressed by BRT but especially the heavy rail system in the Atlanta region. 
>> I want to go through a few slides that will give you perspective in terms of history because often times I'm asked why is it taking so long to put together so we started way back in 2001 with the system designed for what was at the time a 13 county modeling domain.  At the time also we did our house of travel survey which means the following year we did a lot of the preparatory work and analysis of the SMARTRAQ, and finally in '03 was the grid beginning of our population synthesizer so PopSyn was born.  At the time you put heavy emphasis on 1990 that casting, it was quite important to verify our PopSyn and in early '04, we hosted a TMIP model period review in one of the recognitions was the early deployment of populations of the sizer as a step towards taking things happen with regard to the base model.  However, only 2004 dpi [Indiscernible] into 20 whole counties and also couple partial counties within the intellect the area [Indiscernible] so as result of this nonattainment designation we had to more or less [Indiscernible] efforts on hold and we [Indiscernible] to expand our fourth step trip-based model from 13 to 20 counties.  In order to the federal requirement for performing analysis. 
>> Then finally in '05 again more work in the area expansion and calibration and validation over for step trip-based model.  Wouldn't that mean to our ABM? Model development efforts cost of them tremendously.  Our efforts were rather disbursed almost all over the place and that really seriously impacted the progress at the time.  In '06 [Indiscernible] able to get back on track to some extent so we expanded our 13 county oblation synthesizer to 20 county model architecture.  And said the PopSyn was presented at May of 06 to be at the Austin conference and at the time the PopSyn and still is to the state a Java-based.  In '07 catching up some steam here we were able to implement our long-term choice models -- workplace destination, the patient was model in school destination, location choice as well as the automobile ownership model. 
>> Then in no way it is more focus on the actual core choice models for the short-term choice models so they quit needed to the activity pattern for household joint travel activities including generation and participations of models go to or destination choice for all purposes and to remote choice into a time of day and some frequency for all of Tori types and [Indiscernible] all to her types for the purposes and true placement within the two chamber together a parking choice for auto trips to the Atlantis until-based district.  Also back in the implemented all that  you see the [Indiscernible] expression calculator and that's for blue chip model specification and basically from the spreadsheet to go from spreadsheets to Java.  At the time also what ABM was and still using 2.2 TP+ as the graphical user interface. 
>> Finally, getting into 2009 and 2010, this is where more work went into the actual [Indiscernible] skimming for highway and transit could within the model shell application for the PopSyn our models, the core model [Indiscernible] auxiliary models many trucks, externals and so forth.  Can perform some structural calibration with target sources such as the household survey, traffic counts, CTPP and transit ridership data.  And it is a validation in comparison to the existing for step model which I will talk about and if you slight later.  And more software and custom hardware using distributed cluster processing with [Indiscernible] Voyager.  Then ABM his -- I have a few examples of those coming up.  And if you slight later.  Finally today or 2011 through 2012 our goal was to perform some [Indiscernible] and also been working around exploring cloud computing and also more internally [Indiscernible] model for model evaluation and sensitivity testing. 
>> And when they ask what's on tap for KRC 2013 and beyond.  This is  often the transition from the tour base model but really truly just we think you are done it is time to do it all over again what I mean by that as we have new survey data coming online [Indiscernible] go back and revisit the ABM updated for the newer survey data so what else are going to be doing is twofold our trip-based models, recent improvements and fold goes into active a small and I will have that in the following slides.  We will also revisit ARC CT-RAMP activates model estimation and like I said before we will integrate our recently completed household travel survey and also again [Indiscernible] revalidate the model over again and then maybe down the road maybe the next two to three years integration with PECAS land-use model which is also on the parallel track of developing [Indiscernible] AHRQ.  And also integration with the T and microsimulation people we have a few of those projects ongoing and I will talk about those later on.  So over time of course the ultimate goal is to have the full integrated transport and use model and/[Indiscernible] and all that stuff. 
>> So what are those steps that we have recently completed? One of them is to utilize calculated networks and I will talk about that any minute.  I also make use of our new TAZ system.  Right now going to the exercise with the nuisances 2010 census we went in and redid the TAZs and make them will small for mostly traffic assignment results -- applications so a little over 5000 TAZs and also consolidated our [Indiscernible] just had way too many in the past.  We also updating our speeding capacity lookup tables and revising [Indiscernible] function curves, time of day factors and heavy-duty external trucks.  Also we have incorporated some mode choice refinements those using a recently completed trans onboard survey from a couple years ago.  And also revising our highway assignment closure criteria.  A wall along the lines converting emission postprocessor to utilize moves output. 
>> What I mean by calculated networks is as most of you are familiar with naked use of what we call a true shape displayed and that is based on the modified NAVTEQ data and NAVTEQ [Indiscernible] on file.  As result this modifies network with the [Indiscernible] real highway and becomes highway shape file so example on the left is one of our interchanges, so on the left-hand side is the so-called [Indiscernible] network and on the right-hand side is the true shape displayed so that's based on the other resulted completed networks exercise so we've calculated the [Indiscernible] [Indiscernible - low volume] go to should displayed in true linear forms all the way throughout the network.  This is not a requirement but certainly a nice feature to have so we went ahead with that. 
>> here's a few more slides of our active base model actually this is about our visualization system.  As I said before, the ABM is all in Java and the graphic [Indiscernible].  The databases hosted on a SQL Server that allows us to perform some custom analysis that I will show examples of later.  The data is an ASP.net format [Indiscernible] to our visualization dashboard which [Indiscernible] truly in flash but also allows us to generate some additional reports in Excel format for a moment. 
>> Here's an example of visualization so those are persons not at home by TAZ and by our up the date and small box on the lower right-hand side there's a clock [Indiscernible] 11:00 to 12:00 in early afternoon so what the shows you is those are the persons not at home so obviously at work or shopping or at school.  By time of day.  Now we are 10 PM, Levin PM so people are at home so that's what it is not showing anything and the big block sticking out in the middle is the airport.  That's the TAZ and which the airport is located which is obviously a major employer in the region, I think 25,000 jobs at the airport.  This gives you a feel for how we can actually visualize active base model result in a matter of just a couple minutes.  On the following slides of those are persons by TAZ and hour of the day.  Again, the clock on the right side now it is at early afternoon.  So what this is actually showing are mostly people being at work as you can see going to the evening hours people leaving work.  Going home so you see those TAZ are mostly residential [Indiscernible] clock is back to the morning hours so leaving home going to work and to downtown and back to the centers.  Again this allows us to visualize ABM results and when they asked what does that tell you? It tells us a few things about for instance daytime populations and also is the lookout for [Indiscernible] for emergencies so emergency planning and that sort of activity. 
>> We've also performed some future year sensitivity testing with our active base model.  We've looked at a couple scenarios I will talk about those in the next few minutes.  The first one is HIV to hunt scenario and managed lanes so what we've done is according to our plan we converted HOV lanes on interstate and on the Georgia 400 which is the portion, the segment quarter with a 285 people convert those HOV lanes into hot lanes were HOV and [Indiscernible] may have to pay depending on the policies that we were testing.  The facilities [Indiscernible] per mile and at those prices varied by time of day. 
>> I now have the results of the following sites to another test that we've done is what we call in the regions concept three scenario which is a name for very substantial major transit investment scenario and additional heavy rail lines and regenerative the BRT, commuter rail, Philly BRT, in other words, this is translating itself into 50% increase in transit system route mile.  Really you hit your ABM pretty heavily with some major projects to see how it reacts and how it behaves. 
>> This is what the actual measured transit investment scenario looks like.  Just a map over 20 countries can with the additional transit service highlighted here in the colored lines. 
>> So with that, some of the results from that when the transit one, we wanted to compare how it performed with the the base model so when you look at line boarding for those nature routes [Indiscernible] more than 10,000 boardings per day.  You will see that the ABM generates a few more boardings, transit boardings meaning it is more sensitive to more aspects and more toys not as limiting as it is with the trip-based model. 
>> Again here when you look at station boardings a number of boards those are for the most part are -- transit stations.  Again here that shows the ABM in general for the most part generates a few more trips than metric-based model.  Again due to the sensitivity with the increased [Indiscernible] sensitivity of [Indiscernible] when you compare that against the forced to trick-based model. 
>> So what were findings from our future your scenario testing with ABM? Be found at the ABM displays the appropriate sensitivities when it is compared to base your results and also when it is compared against our existing trick-based model runs results for the same thing.  We ran those scenarios through the ABM and before step model and compared.  More specifically, recall HOV2HOT manage when scenario, within the [Indiscernible] creases [Indiscernible] and also exhibits peaks pretty which is not necessarily always captured within the four step trip is conventional aggregate model.  When looking at the transit heavy investment in transit scenario, many findings could but one of the most interesting ones is that it reflects aging the transit writers due to the aging of the population over time.  I think we've done that for a planning horizon of 2040. 
>> So this allows us to come up with what we call new measures.  This one here, this graphic shows travelers by age so in the very light green shade of the transit travelers.  In the medium green shade at the actual travelers of folks making trips in the region and dark green shows total population and if you look on the Y axis this is the actual age groups starting at obviously zero going up to 100.  Asyou can see we are able to finally have a better feel for the aging of the transit writers so this is something we were not able to do with our force that model but quite enlightening with the active base model when you compare aging and transit. 
>> I've talked about RC2 clamp cluster.  Here's what it looks like when you go up into our server room and take a picture of it.  We have our 48 processor dual core Dell servers with 32 gigabytes of ram each so you see the four blades kind of looking like a blade server, those are the four blades of there.  You look at investment of roughly around $30,000 so quite substantial to go of course, our active base model like this model I'm sure run on servers a [Indiscernible] equipment it will not run on your desktop because they will not run on your laptop unless you want to Qaeda forever and ever and ever.  So we decided to make an investment in additional IT equipment and you are looking at it. 
>> Also something else we've been working on lately is the cloud computing.  The ARC at the base model is now in the cloud working with our travel [Indiscernible] software companies [Indiscernible].  So we've put with their systems in our consultants we've put the ARC idiom on the cloud but what does that mean? What is that allow us to do? It was [Indiscernible] it allows us to manage multiple scenarios in simultaneous runs so we wanted to see how much more effective this could be compared to our service equipment. 
>> So we've done some cloud runtimes and whenever observations we've noticed some diminishing returns around 128 course which is 16 instances with our existing current set up so the Suite Spot is that 128 cores.  That tells you something.  It is what it is telling us is there's a need to perhaps optimize the code, optimize the CT-RAMP cook with [Indiscernible] ARC model [Indiscernible] authentication [Indiscernible] data manager could potentially be a bottlenecks and the reason is a handles so much I own put output data that  is more or less created [Indiscernible] bottleneck but obviously in the perfect computer science IT world there should not be a suite spot at 128, it should be abstaining positive returns as the more you throw at the quicker, faster Ishir Bhan.  But like I said, this tells us about the efficient server [Indiscernible] to optimize it a bit more. 
>> Visualizations and travel [Indiscernible] modeling we have quite a few examples set up right now so on your free time I invite you to check our website channel.  It has a lot of our visual examples to go again this is just a snapshot of what it looks like right now.  But again, it is a way for us to offer -- make those visual tools available for folks to look at. 
>> This one here I think Bhargava is good help me in bring up the actual files.  This is what you're looking at right now.  This is from our household travel survey.  So you see in the lower left-hand side is the clock at six AM, so let me tell you what you are looking at.  You are looking at -- those are what we call detail at types coming out of our household travel survey we just recently completed a few months ago so in general what you see green is an at-home activity.  That is at work, work related activity.  Lavendar is at school or school related activity orange is shopping or eating out.  Blue is institutional or personal business, yellow is recreational, volunteer activities, great in black is everything else.  So as you can see as the [Indiscernible] it is 11 PM a nice so most of the folks are at home meaning the green dots are showing for the most part.  Let's play it one more time. 
>> Five AM, 6:00 AM, most agree, people are out now, you see how it is turning reddish red, those are at the workplace so people are at work and then around lunchtime it is pretty much all over the place.  Afternoon still at work, 2:00, 3:00 you're at work hopefully, 4:00, 5:00 and then it is turning green meaning folks are leaving work and going back home for the most part.  Again, just another way to allow us to visualize this was done with our so consultants [Indiscernible] GOs that helped us out putting this together.  I think we can go to the following one.  We have one more of those. 
>> Thank you.  Before -- let me tell you what you're going to be looking at.  This is from our GPS subsample so this was 10,000 households travel survey so we had a 10% GPS which is obviously 1000 households.  Here when you put it -- all the GPS to this together on a daily basis what you're going to be looking at and I will start it and describe what you are looking at.  At the red dots and the redline's our work locations and trips to work.  They are as the crow flies they are not on the network, purple dots and lines art school locations and trips to school.  All grays is in college but by the green dots and the green lines are home locations and trips going back home.  The gray dots and lines are out to locations and trips.  So a busy in the evening those are mostly trips going home.  And then 10:00 PM it goes up to midnight, fewer trips because you're not traveling,  you're at home.  Let's play it again. 
>> So keep in mind the dots represent the GPS survey participant at the location of that activity at that time stamp listed.  The alliance our active trips.  You will see this is of course [Indiscernible] region, but [Indiscernible] interesting facts -- troops coming in and out of the 20 county region reaching up to the north, south East, West as we expected.  So this is another tool for us to visualize results from a household travel survey that then obviously feeds into our active base model develop and activities.  Let's get back to the slides and I will take it from there. 
>> Thank you.  I've mentioned earlier some of our other activities going on.  We've had a transference project your in the coming to Region so what we did is we converted our network into transit network many network [Indiscernible] tables everything and we ran it for certain projects and the reason why we are doing this is we are looking for in the near future some point in time to hook up at the base model with some micro Sem so we may try to leverage some of our TRANSIMS that's been accomplished so far. 
>> Also looking into integrated subarea modeling.  We are looking at here is the 20 county model network.  Than subarea modeling means performance subarea in this case [Indiscernible] project in our downtown area so start with 20 county model and then subarea for the downtown area which you cut out more or less and we put that into [Indiscernible] microsimulation which is the picture on the right-hand side.  Again, it is just a matter of expanding or rather enhancing the toolbox as we are called upon performing more and more project level types of analysis. 
>> In terms of conclusions and lessons learned, as you can see, our active base model like most of not all active base model requires further detail and [Indiscernible] QA/QC, quality control.  Our approach has been slow on purpose.  We were very, very careful, very deliberate about that but we want to make sure that what comes out of the ABM is fully [Indiscernible] and there've been a small few instances where it is like your looking under the hood sodas be so you look under the hood and you need to rewire a few things, that's what we found out so we've been doing that.  Also the reason I had these illustrations for household travel survey efforts is its support to design and conceptualize or household travel survey within ABM model system in mind.  As you write out the questions or as you prepare your survey it is always good to keep in mind that you want to apply this to an active base model because the way you ask certain questions, the way you phrase it or the things you ask are slightly different in order for a four step model our active base model.  But was also a deliberate choice on our end was a choice we made on purpose we wanted to maintain a parallel model development track with our four step trip-based model to go for different reasons.  [Indiscernible] over the years we had -- first of models we didn't want to throw it out overnight.  We've even in the past couple years invested in it to maintain it and bring up to speed, of two par so additional enhancements and improvements in the force that model, but then we were able to leverage those in turn is over into the ABM and that's what we are going to be doing working on next year. 
>> Like anything else come active base model requires lots of the following items to go dedicated staff resources and ongoing training.  We have at least one full-time model are here, Dr. [Indiscernible] who works very specifically on QA/QC aspects of our ABM beside trying it and analyzing the results and that sort of thing.  Data, lots of data but there comes from surveys or there's alternative ways to look at data right now and example I have here is your stage [Indiscernible] data sets which over time may take over traditional expensive surveys we do every 10 years.  Computer research says, service and cloud computing.  We are at a point or other say we played with both and we are approaching decision-making point and in the fork in the road which we want to go and we are still exploited cloud computing.  Of course over time it is probably better to go with the cloud, but there some safety or Security issues, very minor, but once you're model is out there you're going to literally manage who has access to it and who does and who can do what.  We can change what so which is a nice thing in the sense that you can letter really be able to manage and see who has access and who can change what as it is being used throughout the region for different investment studies or quota studies were studies from our planning partners and stakeholders.  Servers obviously upfront of the [Indiscernible] investments, but once you've made that investment clearly you see by your runtimes that it is very efficient, but again like anything else, servers after couple years they become slightly outdated.  So I would suggest to folks looking at both avenues to really compare pros and cons.  Consultants assistance, of course couldn't have done that on our own so we are very pleased and grateful to have obtained the systems from [Indiscernible] in the earlier phases.  Programming expertise.  This is all in Java so obviously program expertise became quite important in order to not only when the model but if you want to make some changes into your model structure it is always good to have some working knowledge of Java in this case.  For ABM.  Also GIS and what I call a true GeoDataBase for project level planning.  The reason I have this year is because we're going to try to hook up with our planning folks on the side of the House year and make sure that the planning database is a GeoDataBase which would facilitate and enhance -- types of model [Indiscernible] active base model.  So while it is not a requirement for an ABM it is always nice to have your project level planning information into a true GeoDataBase or GPB format [Indiscernible].  Of course, lots of financial resources.  I've got them listed here in the order of a million dollars at least when you look at and that would include your survey efforts and consultants and model development efforts. 
>> And servers and all that stuff.  So what is our most crucial step is to finally move our ABM into practice and official production mode.  What I mean by that is so we can take this into [Indiscernible] demonstrate conformity and that circle with the next year or two.  Thus far active base models are being developed and applied mostly in regions where forced that models have been abandoned or never developed.  This may not hold true anymore, more and more of us have a [Indiscernible] forced to model still heading into the direction of ABM and of course rigorous practical testing and cross comparisons of your ABM which is a four step trip-based model and in our case we are thankful they are in good shape so that was funny possible in the Atlanta region.  Of course one may ask or wonder are you getting different results, is a totally different or is it probable and if it is comparable then why bother? The long answer to this question is that it allows us for additional analysis that we cannot do with the 4-Step model.  For instance anything that deals with telecommuting you get more flexibility with an active base model.  As I demonstrated in the earlier slides, managed lanes and rotary pricing, but also how to have a better feel for the impact of aging population into future model results. 
>> I think -- yes, this slide that will take questions or comments at this point in time.  Bryant, I will turn it back over to you. 
>> Thank you very much.  I want to extend the invitation for folks to submit questions in the question popped that we can discuss further.  Right now there is one and it is admittedly mine and he started touching on this at the end of your session, but you put up a slide comparing that to be-based model and trip-based model transit line boardings and I was wondering if one does better against a observed data and the [Indiscernible] year than the other? 
>> Let me scroll back to that slide.  It is not too far back.  This one and the following.  Let's start with this one here.  As I said before my presentation, maybe we should -- let's go forward to that slide.  So the ABM displays the appropriate sensitivities when we compared it to the base your results and also existing trip-based model runs so we did look at our results coming out of our ABM and then looking at Basie results meaning real-time data whether it is from census or other sources.  Traffic count data, survey data and obviously the ABM performed row well so we were able to replicate or duplicate the base year in this case 2005 model results before we could even think about putting into forecasting mode.  We wanted to make sure they could replicate reality so what ABM is able to match quite well traffic count but also in the transit side with transit boardings.  So going back to that slide here, what this one shows us that this is for future year and it clearly allows us to -- active base model.  There's more boardings meaning there's more sensitivities that are built within more choice so when you compare against trip-based model is very limiting and limited so that's one example and then the other slide when you look at transit station boardings, same thing here.  A few more boardings with the active base model compared to the trip-based model.  But like I said we are able to match [Indiscernible] results initially. 
>> Does that answer your question? 
>> It does.  Thank you. 
>> Good. 
>> I don't see that any other questions have been submitted.  I just want to again and thank you for filling in last-minute.  Also remind folks that we have another session scheduled for November 15 and Elizabeth [Indiscernible] at the San Francisco County Transportation Authority will be discussing and presenting that agencies experience developing and applying their activity-based model. 
>> So without any questions, I think we can conclude this session and again, thank you to Guy and who all who participated. 
>> All right, thanks, Bryant. 
>> Thank you everyone. 
>> [Event concluded]